Jaju: Hello thinkers (and doers!?) I need some help today. I want to survey your minds and extract your definition of the term "democracy."

What does democracy mean to you? What defines the people? What defines majority? With 2 splits, 51% is majority. With 4 splits, 26% could be majority too. But in the latter case, 74% - even if they do not agree with the 26%, would end up being subjected to the whims and fancies of the 26%.


That's the model of our "democracy." What is it? How are we faring? Thoughts?

AmitU: Constitutionally India is not a democracy. If a MP votes against his party line on certain kind of bills he will have to be asked to be resigned/vote not allowed. (unless he gathers support of 1/3rd of other MPs of his party). 

This measure (anti defection law) is done to avoid government instability, but it has constitutionally made Sonia Gandhi the de facto head of Indian (legislative) state. It doesn't matter if Sonia is not elected for anything, as long as she is party president of ruling party (and thus controls more than 2/3rd of MPs of her party).

AmitU: I think there is some flaw in your assumption Jaju, a bill requires either simple majority (50% of yes among voted), or 2/3rd majority, or probably even some other amount of healthy majority. 

70% of India never has to be forced to agree by 30%. 

I think you are confusing government formation with bills/decisions. During govt formation 30% BJP can lose to 20% Congress + 10% X + 10% Y + 10% Z. But not during the bills. A bill will have support of reasonable definition of majority. But in this case, if you forget parties, and assume each MP is uniform, then 50%+ India decides who the next PM is going to be.

Despite the technical flaw I mentioned in my previous comment, the problem of India is people of India do not participate in elections, no I do not mean that they do not turn up to vote, nobody keeps track of their representatives activities. No one calls their representatives. 

We are forever looking for some massiha to come and save us. Be it Modi or Kejriwal. I am pretty sure no one in this thread knows the name of the MP who represents them in their domicile, and his 3 closest competitors.

Off topic: I have not seen a single matchbox in Chile that has striking coating on two sides, and I have not seen a single matchbox in India that has striking coating on one side. Striking coating costs money, and reducing it to one side will make money to matchbox manufacturers. The Indian matchbox manufacturers will make more money if they made a small change, but they do not do that. Not because we have corruption, or because our political system does not work, or because there is rape happening in delhi, but because they are idiots. 

The average IQ of India is 80. Average IQ of China is 104, Japan 108, US 98. 

Democracy does not work in India because Indians are idiots.

Ketan Pandya: Amit Upadhyay:

> The average IQ of India is 80. 
> Average IQ of China is 104, 
> Japan 108, US 98

I presume this is factual information. Can you point us to the source?

Jaju: Making myself clear, Amit - I was referring to the election process. That of forming the government. The bills, constitutional amendments have their own rules within the Parliament and assemblies, but that is relatively more well-defined. Heck - for laws, we don't even involve the public by having referendums! Choose once, and suffer all laws and amendments (or none) for 5 years is the model we have!

Amit: Ketan: I do not have the link with me right now, but http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:AverageIQ-Map-World.png is in the ballpark.

CMS: To add to Ravindra Jaju's, comment: every M.P. only represents X% in his constituency and that X% is very much less than 2/3 or 50%.

CMS: AmitU: har har, Eastern propaganda. We all know anyone can edit wikipedia. The map has clearly been made by some commie chinese and has shown some consideration for their erstwhile Russian friends.

Jaju: Ok - I have to clearly unlike one of Sumit's and Amit's notes. Please settle this soon! :-)

Amit Upadhyay: Jaju & Sumit, how so ever you do that maths, as long as more than 50% of MPs are choosing govt, 50% of India has effectively chosen govt in a random sampling sense. This is no "unfairness" in that and it can be proven with maths. 

And here is another link: http://www.targetmap.com/viewer.aspx?reportId=4923, this one is more "informative" 

Ravindra Jaju: Incidentally, Sumit means well-measured, and Amit means that which has not been (or can not be) measured. And we want hard numbers and evidences here! :-p

Ravindra Jaju: Amit - I could have agreed with you to an extent if we had a 2-party system (so, a 3-way split is imaginable - that's where my extent of agreement to 50% goes.) But with so many parties, and the possibilities of so many independents, and our supposedly low average IQ, we have disagreement here.

Sumit Kumar: To simplify further. Say there are 500 constituencies with 5 contestants and 100 voters(who vote) in each constituency. Assume that average winning candidate gets around 30 votes. 

Say a party wins 250 seats and forms govt. How many people is the party representing? I would say it would be 7500 out of 50000 people who voted.

Amit Upadhyay: Thats why I said random sampling sense. If you randomly selected 1% of India to vote, the voting pattern would be exactly the same as if whole of india would have voted.

Unless there is some party/process/phenomena who can skew the ones selected, it is (mathematically provable) fair representation of Indian population's choice.

For further reading: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_averages

Sumit Kumar Amit Upadhyay I think you are misinterpreting meaning of the word "representation". By representation I mean how many people are being directly(by vote) represented by the winning candidate/party.

Amit Upadhyay If 60% vote in a two party system, do you think the selected president represents 30% or 50%? Quick CMS answer this.

Sumit Kumar The president represents 50% of the electorate and by "law of averages" 50% of the population.

Ravindra Jaju Amit - No one formula can claim to be absolutely fair. A 2-party system can at only represent 3 distinct stands on an issue. Bring in multiple issues, and no one party will have a simple stand on all issues to which all their voters will agree to. Voters will choose the best match. Now, grow it to a 20-party system, and suddenly you will see that there's no notion of "representing" (not a 'representative sample'.) I think that's what even Sumit is talking about.

Sumit Kumar But if the winning M.P. is winning 30% of the votes polled he would be representing only 30% and the PM would be representing only 15%.

Amit Upadhyay So if you remove the last candidate in a multi party election, do you think the rest of the candidates will get the votes of the removed member in the ratio they received the vote? (eg if a(20%) b(18%) c(..), z(1%). if z is removed, and the 1% are asked to vote, would they expect to vote in a fashion like the rest of the population or not? You can keep doing it again and again, and in statistical sense a will still win. If a and b were close, there might be some statistical error like flip flops, but that will average out.

Amit Upadhyay I am talking about fairness. It is fair representation of Indias choice (as long as elections were fair etc). And this is not the cause of the problem. The same people will win, no matter how you conducted the election, as long as they have the money they have and people are apathetic that they are.

Ravindra Jaju A thought experiment. A' and A'' represent an ideology that B and C are at odds with. B and C too have distinct constituencies. A' and A'' fight the elections, as do B and C, with 50% of the people supporting A' and A'' combined (say, 30:20 split.) B has the support of 32% people, and C, 18%. B will win, but if A'' withdraws, there's big likelihood that A' might win. (Let's assume the ratios are only of the voters - the non-voters are will stay the way they are whether there are 2 candidates, or 20. Unless the 3rd or the 21st candidate is "None of the Above" maybe.)

Sumit Kumar The discussion is not about whether it is a win or not or whether it is fair. It is about how people are represented in reality and not by statistics.

Edit to clarify: This was in response to Amit Upadhyay's comment and not to Ravindra Jaju's comment

Ravindra Jaju I think you meant 18% for C.

Amit Upadhyay People will only be ever represented statistically. What other options do we have? Physically? I am all for direct democracy, cut out the representatives, directly vote on bills. That will still leave the job of executive branch to be elected, and we will still have to resort to statistics. 

Methodology A vs Methodology B is only worth discussing if one asserts the outcomes O(A) and O(B) would be different, I am asserting whatever methodology of election you pick, we will have roughly the same MPs, unless something else changes. Changing methodology will not change the actual MPs elected.

Sumit Kumar Amit Upadhyay OT, you must surely believe in "survival of the fittest" tautology then.

Ravindra Jaju Amit - I think you are over-simplifying. This isn't a random, physical process we are talking of. There are a lot more control knobs we would like to work with, and factors we have to account for.
All of this involves human emotions, greed, need, identity, groupism and ego. That the large number of seats in UP and Bihar and their local issues can completely over-ride the aspirations of folks in Goa (because a PM from Goa is least likely, but that from UP - (Sonia is the current super-PM) is generally true.)
So many trains go through Delhi (political will and need), many through Nagpur (because it is really central), but the needs of Pune where I live are completely ignored.

Vivek Kumar Ravindra Jaju, ok.. but Amit Upadhyay's idea is pretty much spot on. You can tinker with the election mechanism but it won't change the outcomes for most part. And so, our system is no less "representative" than any other democratic mechanism. 

Australia has the transferrable vote - remove the last candidate in each round of counting and distribute his votes among the remaining (depending on the preferences filled in by voters on who is their No. 2, 3 etc.). It still produces a 2-party structure with some minor parties and independents here and there. The current Australian parliament is so tightly balanced that an ill-advised bathroom break by an MP can lead to government's downfall (Australian parliament locks the chamber doors at the time of voting on bills).

India has already evolved a 2-coalition mechanism, which is fairly ok. I mean, in a country as diverse as India and with a strong centre and weaker states, it is unrealistic to hope that 2 parties can dominate national elections. The INC monopoly was a hangover from independence movement and it had to wither away at some point. BJP monopoly is equally unlikely. We will evolve more concrete coalitions in times to come, surely.

I don't think it would be worthwhile to change the election mechanism as such.

Amit Upadhyay But Jaju, what can we do about it is the question? Changing the methodology of election will not make pune better. It will stay the same. 

I care about what you are saying, I am just saying all this talk about how we count is not going to make things better, its a distinction without a difference. 

If you talk about changing systems that can have any actual outcome I have one idea: remove the money collection limits from politics. 

To give you an example, I think MLA election in UP has a upper limit of 15L per candidate as the money they can spend in election. Now (unofficially) almost every MLA candidate who stands on behalf of SP gets 1Cr from party fund, and people who are close to inner circles get 2Cr and the star ones get 5Cr. Almost everyone knows that, but it is impossible to stop it, all money is in black, and everyone involved is pretty damn claver, hawala etc, and they have huge power, and in a lot of cases money is spent in a "soft" fashion, people "donate" column space in news papers, people "donate" hoardings, no actual money transfer takes place.

I assert it is impossible to control this, to ensure every candidate will only spend only what they are allowed to. Election Commission is a bunch of dumb idiots to continue to not accept this reality. 

This means any "proper" candidate, who does not want to break the rules, and thus limits his spending to 15L has ever any chance of winning. The problem is not that he can not raise funds. People are willing to give money to get rid of corrupt people, but Mr EC will not allow them to. 

I believe if you remove the limits lot more honest people will get elected, and country would be much better off.
