We fish developers are keenly aware that shells are very personal, and that switching shells means abandoning certain workflows, learning new ones, and tolerating a period of lowered productivity and increased frustration. Congratulations to anyone willing to even try it.
fish is not the most powerful shell, but chances are you do not use the full power of bash anyways. If you are like most people, you read about a cool feature of bash, and maybe even use it a few times, but then it slips away: you just can't keep all of this syntax in your head, and recall it fast enough to make it useful.
What distinguishes fish is that its features aim for low cognitive load and shallow learning curves. The automatic syntax highlighting and autosuggestions are great examples: they make you instantly more productive, with nothing to learn and nothing to even remember to use.
That said, if you want to share your history substitution workflows, lots of people will be happy to share how they accomplish the same thing in fish. One example: to replace the sudo !! pattern in bash, I hit up arrow (to recall the last command), control-A to go to the beginning of the line, and then type sudo, for about the same number of keystrokes.
Preferring improved editing to terse syntax has other benefits: instant feedback, and less syntax to escape. The rules for when you must escape a literal ! in bash are rather complicated.
Do ctrl+s and ctrl+r still do the same thing in fish?
fish does have incremental history search, both at the entire command level and per-token level. It is not as powerful as in bash (you cannot do a "live edit" of the query), but it also avoids the whole confusing modal search UI as well.
In practice, I find the autosuggestions to be very helpful here, as they show the most recent matching history item "for free" (without you having to ask for it). You can usually summon up your most common commands by just typing the first letter.
Can I configure the way the history is stored in the same way I can with bash?
There is no configuration of history at all. I think there are no useful history options in bash (who cares what the size or name of the history file is?), but maybe I'm wrong - do you mind sharing which history configuration options you like to set in bash?
How does the fishrc file look?
fish does have its equivalent to .bashrc (~/.config/fish.config), but typically it is empty. How is that possible? Consider what goes into .bashrc:
Variable definitions. With fish, you simply define a universal variable once, and it applies to all other sessions, now and in the future. For example, set -U EDITOR vim. Probably there are at least a few variables that you have never gotten around to adding to your .bashrc; with fish you can make such a variable permanent without even firing up a text editor.
Function definitions. Here fish uses autoloading functions. Again, it is easy to make a permanent function:
alias ll 'ls -lh'
funcsave ll
Configuration options like shopt. fish has none: what minimal configuration there is is done through setting variables.