Don't cripple clean politicians
M V Rajeev Gowda | Oct 8, 2013, 12.00 AM IST
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Rahul Gandhi's dramatic denunciation of the ordinance that aimed to
protect convicted politicians has already shaken up the system. Criminal
politicians will go to jail, lose their seats and be disqualified from
contesting for a substantial period of time. India's wheels of justice
grind slowly but Lalu Prasad is only among the first to be crushed fine
by a system that many mock or try to manipulate.

Rajeev Dhavan's op-ed 'Fixing a Flawed Democracy' (October 4), lays the
blame squarely on politicians and laments that 'goondas' are winnable
candidates. But how did criminals come to dominate in the first place?
Are there fundamental flaws in our political system that makes it favour
the tainted over the sainted? Have civil society's pincer movements in
courts only attacked the symptoms? Can we identify and attack the root
causes instead?

One fundamental flaw is our farcically low limit on election
expenditure. Enacted with the good intention of making elections
accessible to people of modest means, India established very low limits
on how much candidates can spend on elections. The Election Commission
tries hard to enforce these limits, with spectacularly counterproductive
results.

Today, candidates typically start their parliamentary careers with a
lie, by under-declaring how much they spent on their elections. Telling
the truth would result in disqualification. Similarly, candidates who
can raise white money openly cannot spend more than the Rs 40-lakh limit
in parliamentary constituencies of larger states. Thereby, clean
politicians are crippled by the system.

Low limits ignore the numerous legitimate expenses associated with
campaigning. In the private sector, a marketing campaign aiming to reach
20 lakh people may cost at least Rs 100 per person. But to reach 20 lakh
voters, politicians cannot spend more than Rs 2 per voter! Feeding
volunteers and sending a postcard to each voter would exhaust that
budget.

Therefore, across the board, parties have tried to cope by favouring
candidates with black money and the networks and capability to expend
those resources. Such candidates, whose political foundations are built
on lawbreaking, typically hijack the political system for private
profiteering. The rare few get caught and eventually convicted.

We need to get out our deep denial and make expenditure limits realistic
(e.g. Rs 15-20 crore per Lok Sabha candidate) or get rid of them
altogether. Then, as election expenditures emerge overground, cleaner
candidates who can raise white resources will also be ableto compete.
Unlike today when people want clean candidates but political parties
shun them on the criterion of 'winnability'.

As a country, we also need to make it possible for people to back their
preferred candidates openly. This will allow the electorate to hold
their candidates accountable. Contemporary political movements are
already demonstrating that public-spirited Indians, including the middle
class, will willingly contribute to causes instead of pontificating from
armchairs.

One way to bring this about is by allowing open contributions to
individual candidates. Currently, our laws allow people to contribute to
parties by cheque (and get their taxable incomes reduced by that
amount). Corporations too can donate up to 5% of their last three years'
profits. However, these provisions apply to contributions to political
parties and not individual candidates. This only results in centralising
the control of party funds and weakening the connection between citizen
and candidate.

In a representative democracy, the candidate represents and is
responsible to the citizen electorate. It is worth recalling that
Mahatma Gandhi introduced the 'char-anna' membership for the Congress.
Through small contributions he made the masses a stakeholder in swaraj.
Similarly, we should enable individuals to contribute small sums and
help free politicians from dependence on plutocrats and vested
interests.

Today, parties typically resort to filling their coffers by collecting
donations just below Rs 20,000. These resources could substantially be
unaccountable funds, including from crooks and criminals. Earlier, names
of the donors did not need to be reported. However, the Central
Information Commissioner's recent ruling that political parties fall
under the purview of the Right to Information Act may force parties to
show who gave whom how much.

Instead of playing cat and mouse games with political parties, India
needs to wake up and smell the coffee. Free, fair and effective
democracy costs money. Parties need huge resources to sustain
themselves, whether in office or in the opposition.
Politics is practically a full-time job but we expect politicians to
live on love and fresh air.

We must learn to contribute openly and hold our representatives
accountable. We must explore different state funding formulae to
encourage political participation. We must bring every aspect of the
political process into the open. For sunlight is the best disinfectant.

As more sections of society actively contribute and participate, the
political system will undergo a transformation. Then, the
much-celebrated NOTA and 'right to reject' will become mere footnotes in
history. We will see inclusive, empowered parties, citizen candidates
and positive politics.

Parliament can still use the forthcoming winter session to reform
counterproductive aspects of party financing and election expenditure
laws. That will set a virtuous cycle in motion and make India truly the
world's largest democracy, instead of the world's largest hypocrisy.

--
The writer is a professor, Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore,
and a Congress spokesperson. Views are personal.

--
Snapshot taken on 11:40AM, Tue Oct 8 2013 from:
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/home/opinion/edit-page/Dont-cripple-clean-politicians/articleshow/23660793.cms
